Science

Etymology

The word science comes through the Old French, and is derived from the Latin 
word scientia for knowledge, which in turn comes from scio 'I know' The Indo-
European root means to discern or to separate, akin to Sanskrit chyati, he cuts 
off, Greek schizein, to split, Latin scindere, to split  From the Middle Ages to 
the Enlightenment, science or scientia meant any systematic recorded knowledge  
Science therefore had the same sort of very broad meaning that philosophy had at 
that time In other languages, including French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian, 
the word corresponding to science also carries this meaning 

From classical times until the advent of the modern era, "philosophy" was 
roughly divided into natural philosophy and moral philosophy In the 1800s, the 
term natural philosophy gradually gave way to the term natural science Natural 
science was gradually specialized to its current domain, which typically 
includes the physical sciences and biological sciences The social sciences, 
inheriting portions of the realm of moral philosophy, are currently also 
included under the auspices of science to the extent that these disciplines use 
empirical methods As currently understood, moral philosophy still retains the 
study of ethics, regarded as a branch of philosophy 

Today, the primary meaning of "science" is generally limited to empirical study 
involving use of the scientific method 


Scientific method

 
The Bohr model of the atom, like many ideas in the history of science, was at 
first prompted by and later partially disproved by experiment The scientific 
method seeks to explain the complexities of nature in a replicable way, and to 
use these explanations to make useful predictions It provides an objective 
process to find solutions to problems in a number of scientific and 
technological fields Often scientists have a preference for one outcome over 
another, and scientists are conscientious that it is important that this 
preference does not bias their interpretation A strict following of the 
scientific method attempts to minimize the influence of a scientist's bias on 
the outcome of an experiment This can be achieved by correct experimental design, 
and a thorough peer review of the experimental results as well as conclusions of 
a study 

Scientists use models to refer to a description or depiction of something, 
specifically one which can be used to make predictions that can be tested by 
experiment or observation A hypothesis is a contention that has been neither 
well supported nor yet ruled out by experiment A theory, in the context of 
science, is a logically self-consistent model or framework for describing the 
behavior of certain natural phenomena A theory typically describes the behavior 
of much broader sets of phenomena than a hypothesis—commonly, a large number of 
hypotheses may be logically bound together by a single theory A physical law or 
law of nature is a scientific generalization based on a sufficiently large 
number of empirical observations that it is taken as fully verified 

Scientists never claim absolute knowledge of nature or the behavior of the 
subject of the field of study Unlike a mathematical proof, a scientific theory 
is empirical, and is always open to falsification, if new evidence is presented 
Even the most basic and fundamental theories may turn out to be imperfect if new 
observations are inconsistent with them Critical to this process is making every 
relevant aspect of research publicly available, which permits peer review of 
published results, and also allows ongoing review and repeating of experiments 
and observations by multiple researchers operating independently of one another 
Only by fulfilling these expectations can it be determined how reliable the 
experimental results are for potential use by others 

Isaac Newton's Newtonian law of gravitation is a famous example of an 
established law that was later found not to be universal—it does not hold in 
experiments involving motion at speeds close to the speed of light or in close 
proximity of strong gravitational fields Outside these conditions, Newton's Laws 
remain an excellent model of motion and gravity Since general relativity 
accounts for all the same phenomena that Newton's Laws do and more, general 
relativity is now regarded as a more comprehensive theory 


Philosophy of science

The philosophy of science seeks to understand the nature and justification of 
scientific knowledge and its ethical implications It has proven difficult to 
provide a definitive account of the scientific method that can decisively serve 
to distinguish science from non-science Thus there are legitimate arguments 
about exactly where the borders are There is nonetheless a set of core precepts 
that have broad consensus among published philosophers of science and within the 
scientific community at large (see: Problem of demarcation)

Science is reasoned-based analysis of sensation upon our awareness As such, the 
scientific method cannot deduce anything about the realm of reality that is 
beyond what is observable by existing or theoretical means When a manifestation 
of our reality previously considered supernatural is understood in the terms of 
causes and consequences, it acquires a scientific explanation 

Resting on reason and logic, along with other guidelines such as parsimony, 
scientific theories are formulated and repeatedly tested by analyzing how the 
collected evidence compares to the theory Some of the findings of science can be 
very counter-intuitive Atomic theory, for example, implies that a granite 
boulder which appears a heavy, hard, solid, grey object is actually a 
combination of subatomic particles with none of these properties, moving very 
rapidly in space where the mass is concentrated in a very small fraction of the 
total volume Many of humanity's preconceived notions about the workings of the 
universe have been challenged by new scientific discoveries Quantum mechanics, 
particularly, examines phenomena that seem to defy our most basic postulates 
about causality and fundamental understanding of the world around us Science is 
the branch of knowledge dealing with people and the understanding we have of our 
environment and how it works 

There are different schools of thought in the philosophy of scientific method 
Methodological naturalism maintains that scientific investigation must adhere to 
empirical study and independent verification as a process for properly 
developing and evaluating natural explanations for observable phenomena 
Methodological naturalism, therefore, rejects supernatural explanations, 
arguments from authority and biased observational studies Critical rationalism 
instead holds that unbiased observation is not possible and a demarcation 
between natural and supernatural explanations is arbitrary; it instead proposes 
falsifiability as the landmark of empirical theories and falsification as the 
universal empirical method Critical rationalism argues for the primacy of 
science, but at the same time against its authority, by emphasizing its inherent 
fallibility It proposes that science should be content with the rational 
elimination of errors in its theories, not in seeking for their verification 
(such as claiming certain or probable proof or disproof; both the proposal and 
falsification of a theory are only of methodological, conjectural, and tentative 
character in critical rationalism) Instrumentalism rejects the concept of truth 
and emphasizes merely the utility of theories as instruments for explaining and 
predicting phenomena 


Mathematics and the scientific method
 
Velocity-distribution data of a gas of rubidium atoms, confirming the discovery 
of a new phase of matter, the Bose–Einstein condensate Mathematics is essential 
to many sciences One important function of mathematics in science is the role it 
plays in the expression of scientific models Observing and collecting 
measurements, as well as hypothesizing and predicting, often require 
mathematical models and extensive use of mathematics Mathematical branches most 
often used in science include calculus and statistics, although virtually every 
branch of mathematics has applications, even "pure" areas such as number theory 
and topology Mathematics is fundamental to the understanding of the natural 
sciences and the social sciences, all of which rely heavily on statistics 
Statistical methods, comprised of accepted mathematical formulas for summarizing 
data, allow scientists to assess the level of reliability and the range of 
variation in experimental results 

Whether mathematics itself is properly classified as science has been a matter 
of some debate Some thinkers see mathematicians as scientists, regarding 
physical experiments as inessential or mathematical proofs as equivalent to 
experiments Others do not see mathematics as a science, since it does not 
require experimental test of its theories and hypotheses In practice, 
mathematical theorems and formulas are obtained by logical derivations which 
presume axiomatic systems, rather than a combination of empirical observation 
and method of reasoning that has come to be known as scientific method In 
general, mathematics is classified as formal science, while natural and social 
sciences are classified as empirical sciences 


Goal(s) of science

 

The underlying goal or purpose of science to society and individuals is to 
produce useful models of reality To achieve this, one can form hypotheses based 
on observations that they make in the world By analyzing a number of related 
hypotheses, scientists can form general theories These theories benefit society 
or human individuals who make use of them 

In short, science produces models with useful predictions Science attempts to 
describe what is, but avoids trying to determine what is (which is for practical 
reasons impossible) Science is a useful tool   it is a growing body of 
understanding by which one can contend more effectively with surroundings and to 
better adapt and evolve as a social whole as well as independently 

For a large part of recorded history, science had little bearing on people's 
everyday lives Scientific knowledge was gathered for its own sake, and it had 
few practical applications However, with the dawn of the Industrial Revolution 
in the 18th century, this rapidly changed Today, science has a profound effect 
on the way humans interact with and act upon nature, largely through its 
applications in new technology 

Some forms of technology have become so well established that it is easy to 
forget the great scientific achievements that they represent The refrigerator, 
for example, owes its existence to a discovery that liquids take in energy when 
they evaporate, a phenomenon known as latent heat The principle of latent heat 
was first exploited in a practical way in 1876, and the refrigerator has played 
a major role in maintaining public health ever since (see Refrigeration) The 
first automobile, dating from the 1880s, made use of many advances in physics 
and engineering, including reliable ways of generating high-voltage sparks, 
while the first computers emerged in the 1940s from simultaneous advances in 
electronics and mathematics 

 
Part of a scientific laboratory at the University of Cologne Other fields of 
science also play an important role in the things the developed world use or 
consume every day Research in food technology has created new ways of preserving 
and flavoring of edible products (see Food processing) Research in industrial 
chemistry has created a vast range of plastics and other synthetic materials, 
which have thousands of uses in the home and in industry Synthetic materials are 
easily formed into complex shapes and can be used to make machine, electrical, 
and automotive parts, scientific and industrial instruments, decorative objects, 
containers, and many other items 

Alongside these achievements, science has also brought about technology that 
helps save human and non-human life The kidney dialysis machine enables many 
people to survive kidney diseases that would once have proved fatal, and 
artificial valves allow sufferers of coronary heart disease to return to active 
living Biochemical research is responsible for the antibiotics and vaccinations 
that protect living things from infectious diseases, and for a wide range of 
other drugs used to combat specific health problems As a result, the majority of 
people in the developed world live longer and healthier lives than ever before 

However, scientific discoveries can also have a negative impact in human affairs 
Over the last hundred years, some of the technological advances that make life 
easier or more enjoyable have proved to have unwanted and often unexpected long-
term effects Industrial and agricultural chemicals pollute the global 
environment, even in places as remote as Antarctica, and the air in many cities 
is contaminated by toxic gases from vehicle exhausts (see Pollution) The 
increasing pace of innovation means that products become rapidly obsolete, 
adding to a rising tide of waste (see Solid Waste Disposal) Most significantly 
of all, the burning of fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas releases 
into the atmosphere carbon dioxide and other substances known as greenhouse 
gases These gases have altered the composition of the entire atmosphere, 
producing global warming and the prospect of major climate change in years to 
come 

Science has also been used to develop technology that raises complex ethical 
questions This is particularly true in the fields of biology and medicine (see 
Medical Ethics) Research involving genetic engineering, cloning, and in vitro 
fertilization gives scientists the unprecedented power to bring about new life, 
or to devise new forms of living things At the other extreme, science can also 
generate technology that is designed to deliberately hurt or to kill The fruits 
of this research include chemical and biological warfare, and also nuclear 
weapons, by far the most destructive weapons that the world has ever known 


What the goal is not
Despite popular impressions of science, it is not the goal of science to answer 
all questions The goal of the sciences is to answer only those that pertain to 
perceived reality Also, science cannot possibly address nonsensical, or 
untestable questions, so the choice of which questions to answer becomes 
important Science does not and can not produce absolute and unquestionable truth 
Rather, science tests some aspect of the world and attempts to provide a precise, 
unequivocal framework to explain it This is a goal of science, but it is not an 
absolutely necessary one Usually the framework for a scientific theory is a 
mechanical or physical model, but it may only merely be a mathematical model In 
the latter case, the role of science is lessened from that of explaining 
phenomena to that of merely predicting future phenomena or observations, given 
certain input conditions or observations 

The separate roles of explanation and prediction must be differentiated, because 
science must always provide a clear prediction of future phenomena (by 
definition) but is not always able to provide or differentiate between possible 
explanations for the causes of phenomena As an often cited example, there exist 
a number of models of quantum mechanics which differ in explanation of quantum 
phenomena and in physical models for them, but are all mathematically equivalent 
in prediction For this reason, the possible explanations and physical models 
cannot be differentiated In such cases, natural science does not and cannot 
provide a preferred explanation or mechanical model for reality, but because it 
continues to provide a clear predictive mathematical model for reality, it 
retains its classification as science 

Science is not a source of equivocal value judgments, though it can certainly 
speak to matters of ethics and public policy by pointing to the likely 
consequences of actions What one projects from the currently most unequivocal 
scientific hypothesis onto other realms of interest is not a scientific issue, 
and the scientific method offers no assistance for those who wish to do so 
Scientific justification (or refutation) for many things is, nevertheless, often 
claimed Certain value judgments are intrinsic to science itself For example, 
scientists value relative truth and knowledge, and the actual progress of 
science requires cooperation between scientists, and is highly intolerant of 
dishonesty Cooperation and honesty are thus values which are intrinsic to the 
actual social practice of the scientific method itself 





Scientific literature

An enormous range of scientific literature is published in today's world 
Scientific journals communicate and document the results of research carried out 
in universities and various other research institutions Most scientific journals 
cover a scientific field and publish the research within that field; the 
research is normally expressed in the form of a scientific paper Science has 
become so pervasive in modern societies that it is generally considered 
necessary to communicate the achievements, news, and dreams of scientists to a 
wider populace Science magazines (e g New Scientist, Scientific American) cater 
to the needs of a wider readership and provide a non-technical summary of 
popular areas of research, including notable discoveries and advances in certain 
fields of research Additionally, science books and magazines on science fiction 
ignite the interest of many more people A significant fraction of literature in 
science is also available on the World Wide Web; most reputable journals and 
news magazines maintain their own websites A growing number of people are being 
attracted towards the vocation of science popularization and science journalism 


Fields of science

Science is broadly subdivided into the categories of natural sciences and the 
social sciences There are also related disciplines that are grouped into 
interdisciplinary and applied sciences, such as engineering and health science 
Within these categories are specialized scientific fields that can include 
elements of other scientific disciplines but often possess their own terminology 
and body of expertise 

The status of social sciences as an empirical science has been a matter of 
debate in the 20th century, see Positivism dispute  Discussion and debate abound 
in this topic with some fields like the social and behavioural sciences accused 
by critics of being unscientific In fact, many groups of people from 
academicians like Nobel Prize physicist Percy W Bridgman, or Dick Richardson, Ph 
D —Professor of Integrative Biology at the University of Texas at Austin, to 
politicians like U S Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison and other co-sponsors, oppose 
giving their support or agreeing with the use of the label "science" in some 
fields of study and knowledge they consider non-scientific or scientifically 
irrelevant compared with other fields 

